Medicare Advantage plans are a popular private insurance alternative to Medicare. However, there are some pros and cons to Medicare Advantage.

While some Medicare Advantage plans offer long-term savings, plan flexibility, and better care, others can lead to fewer provider options, additional costs, and lifestyle challenges.

In this article, we’ll explore some advantages and disadvantages of Medicare Advantage plans, as well as how to enroll yourself or a loved one in Medicare.

Medicare Part C plans, also known as Medicare Advantage, are sold by private insurance companies. They combine original Medicare (Medicare Part A and Medicare Part B) coverage and often offer additional benefits.

Many Medicare Advantage plans offer the following benefits:
hospitalization
some home healthcare services
hospice care
doctor’s visits
prescription drug coverage
preventive care
dental
vision
hearing
SilverSneakers fitness memberships

There are different types of Medicare Advantage plans to choose from, including:

Health Maintenance Organization (HMO). HMO plans utilize in-network doctors and require referrals for specialists.
Preferred Provider Organization (PPO). PPO plans charge different rates based on in-network or out-of-network services.
Private Fee-for-Service (PFFS). PFFS plans are special payment plans that offer provider flexibility.
Special Needs Plans (SNPs). SNPs help with long-term medical costs for chronic conditions.
Medical Savings Account (MSA). MSA plans are medical savings accounts paired with high deductible health plans.

Compared to original Medicare, there may be advantages if you choose a Medicare Advantage plan.

Convenient coverage options
Original Medicare only offers two types of coverage: hospital insurance and medical insurance. If you want additional coverage, you’ll need to purchase Medicare Part D for prescription drug coverage and Medigap for supplemental coverage.

With a Medicare Advantage plan, all your coverage options are in one convenient plan.

Personalized plan structures
Medicare Advantage offers different plan types for your personal situation. For example, if you have a chronic health condition, an SNP Advantage plan can help with your medical costs.

If you prefer provider freedom, a PPO or PFFS plan may be more of what you’re looking for. If you want extra services like dental, vision, or hearing, many Medicare Advantage plans include them.

Cost-saving opportunities
Many Advantage plans have no premiums and offer low or no deductibles. Another advantage of choosing Medicare Advantage is that most plans set limits on the maximum out-of-pocket costs you’ll pay during a plan year.

Also, researchTrusted Source has shown that you may save money on laboratory services and medical equipment by switching to a Medicare Advantage plan. If you choose a Medicare HMO plan, you may see even more savings on healthcare services provided by your HMO network.

Coordinated medical care
Many Medicare Advantage plans include coordinated medical care. This means that your healthcare providers actively communicate to coordinate your care between different types of healthcare services and medical specialties. This ensures you have a healthcare team and helps avoid unnecessary expense and issues like medication interactions.

In one studyTrusted Source, researchers found that coordinated care was associated with higher patient ratings and more positive medical staff experiences.

While most people are satisfied with their Medicare Advantage coverage, these plans may also have some disadvantages compared to original Medicare.

Limited service providers
If you choose one of the more popular Medicare Advantage plan types, such as an HMO plan, you may be limited in the providers you can see. You will usually face higher fees if you choose to an out-of-network provider with these plans.

Other plan types do give you more provider freedom, though those plans may have higher premiums and fees like copays and deductibles.

Complex plan offerings
Using Medicare’s find a plan tool, you’ll see that there are many Medicare Advantage plan options depending on your ZIP code. For some people, all these options can feel overwhelming.

Check out our Tips for Choosing a Medicare Advantage Plan article to help you narrow down which Medicare Advantage plans are best for you.

Additional costs for coverage
Original Medicare charges a premium, deductible, and coinsurance for both parts A and B, plus any Part D or Medigap costs.

Medicare Advantage plans often consolidate these costs, but you may notice additional fees. For example, many Medicare Advantage plans include drug deductibles and specialist visit copays.

State-specific coverage
Original Medicare offers the same coverage across the United States. However, Medicare Advantage plans may only offer specific coverage in specific service areas. This means that if you move to a new service area, your current Medicare Advantage plan may be unavailable.

Blue Cross Blue Shield(BCBS) is a massive health insurance company. Through local companies, BCBS provides health insurance to more than 100 million across the United States, including Washington D.C., and Puerto Rico.

These local companies are easy to identify. They typically include some variation of “Blue Cross Blue Shield” in their name, such as Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield Colorado or Florida Blue.

Depending on your location, details of coverage, and monthly premiums for BCBS Medicare Advantage, plans will vary.

However, all plans include original Medicare benefits (parts A and B, which cover hospitalizations, outpatient care, and doctor visits), as well as some added benefits not typically covered by Medicare. That’s why Medicare Advantage is also referred to as Medicare Part C.

Here’s a quick look at what BCBS Medicare Advantage plans typically cover (remember, this will vary by your location and the type of plan you choose):

dental
hearing
vision
prescription drugs
$0 copays (for some preventive services, but not all)
an annual limit on out-of-pocket expenses

Blue Cross Blue Shield offers a variety of Medicare Advantage plans.

These are the main types of Medicare Advantage plans you can enroll in with Blue Cross Blue Shield (again, availability varies by location):

Health Maintenance Organization (HMO) plans
Blue Cross Blue Shield’s Medicare Advantage HMOs are based on in-network primary care, so you’ll choose a primary care professional (PCP) when you enroll. For most specialty care, you’ll see your PCP firstto get a referral for specialty care. There are some exceptions, including emergency care and well-woman exams.

Medicare Advantage HMOs generally include prescription drug costs and often are available with low cost premiums, copays, and deductibles.

Preferred Provider Organization (PPO) plans
Blue Cross Blue Shield’s Medicare Advantage PPOs offer more choices when it comes to primary care. However, you’ll pay less if you choose an in-network professional than if you opt for someone out of network.

Medicare Advantage PPOs can be costlier than HMOs, especially if you choose to visit out-of-network professionals. As with HMOs, most Medicare Advantage PPOs include prescription drug costs. However, PPOs can charge a deductible for both the plan and prescription drugs.

Copays also vary, and they typically range from $0–$50 depending on whether you visit an in-network or out-of-network professional.

Blue Cross Part D (Medicare Part D) plans
Medicare Part D covers prescription drug plans. While some HMOs and PPOs include prescription drug coverage, you can choose a standalone plan if that’s not the case.

Depending on your area, BCBS may offer a few Part D plans for prescription coverage. They have lists of covered medications you can check before enrolling to make sure you’ll benefit.

Some of the BCBS Part D plans require you to pay coinsurance every time you fill a prescription, and many require a copay. Medicare Part D also has a low income subsidy program if you need financial assistance with the cost of your medications.

Private Fee For Services (PFFS) plans
Blue Cross Blue Shield only offers a Medicare Advantage PFFS plan in Arkansas. PFFS plans allow you to choose the healthcare professional you want, regardless of whether they’re in network. You’ll know up front how much your PFFS plan will pay the professional and then you (the insured) are responsible for the remainder.

However, PFFS healthcare professionals can choose whether or not to provide services at the Medicare reimbursement rate. Prescription drug costs aren’t always covered with PFFS plans.

Shopping for insurance can be dizzying, and many states offer dozens of Medicare Advantage options from various insurance companies.

The cost of Blue Cross Blue Shield Medicare Advantage coverage will vary by your location and the plan type you choose. All Medicare Advantage plans require you to pay the standard premium for Medicare Part B, which is $164.90 in 2023.

The right choice for you will depend on your specific coverage needs. To explore your options, type in your zip code using the Medicare Plan Finding Tool. Filter the results by selecting your local BCBS company from the “Insurance Carrier” dropdown menu.

Here are a few example plans for BCBS Medicare Advantage coverage across the United States. For the sake of comparison, we stuck to HMO plans.

New York, New York
Plan: Empire MediBlue Select (HMO)
Covers: health and drug coverage, vision, dental, fitness benefits, worldwide emergency, telehealth
Monthly premium: $0 (not including standard Part B premium of $164.90)
Health deductible: $0
Drug deductible: $350
Out-of-pocket maximum: $8,300 (in network)
St. Louis, Missouri
Plan: Anthem MediBlue Plus (HMO)
Covers: health and drug coverage, vision, hearing, dental, fitness benefits, transportation, worldwide emergency, telehealth, in-home support, home safety devices
Monthly premium: $0 (not including standard Part B premium of $164.90)
Health deductible: $0
Drug deductible: $0
Out-of-pocket maximum: $2,800 (in network)
Portland, Oregon
Plan: Regence Blue Advantage (HMO)
Covers: health and drug coverage, vision, hearing, dental, fitness benefits, worldwide emergency, telehealth, in-home support
Monthly premium: $0 (not including standard Part B premium of $164.90)
Health deductible: $0
Drug deductible: $200
Out-of-pocket maximum: $5,500 (in network)
San Antonio, Texas
Plan: Blue Cross Medicare Advantage Value (HMO)
Covers: health and drug coverage, vision, hearing, dental, fitness benefits, worldwide emergency, telehealth
Monthly premium: $0 (not including standard Part B premium of $164.90)
Health deductible: $0
Drug deductible: $0
Out-of-pocket maximum: $3,000 (in network)
